>>Good afternoon everyone.
My name is Lynne Salameh and I'd like to
welcome you to What's New in Instruments.
[ Applause ]
>>All right here's today's agenda.
Now there's a lot of ground to
cover and a lot of new features
that we've introduced in Instruments and Snow Leopard.
But really all-- our goal was to give you the best
user experience you've had with Instruments to date.
We want to make it very easy for you to
find the data that you're looking for,
data mine it and display it in Instruments.
We've introduced a whole set of
new instrumentation in Snow Leopard
and we've improved the overall performance of Instruments.
And without further ado let's go ahead and jump right in
and begin with a demo of Instruments and Snow Leopard.
My demo application is an application called
ImageWare, which I just brought up in Xcode.
And this application takes PDF pages and
renders them into thumbnails onto a screen.
It also goes through each PDF page's metadata and tries to
determine the number of images that each PDF page contains
and displays it as the subtitle of each thumbnail.
So I'm going to go ahead, build it
and run it and see how it behaves.
So if I just click start, my application is going to
start reading in PDF thumbnails and suddenly it slows down
and I've got this big spinning beach ball.
So this is obviously an area that
we'd like to investigate in terms of,
in order to improve the performance, and now it's done.
So in Snow Leopard, if I bring up Instruments over here,
we've introduced a new instrument called Time Profiler
which will allow you to do very strict, statistical sampling
of your target applications and interferes minimally
with their execution so all the timing
data that you get back is very precise.
Here in my new target chooser in Instruments, I'm going
to select the CPU category from the left and double click
on Time Profiler to bring up the Time Profiler
instrument and let me just enlarge this.
And over here from the executables I'm
going to launch ImageWare and hit record.
All right, if I bring up my app, hit start and you can
see over here in Time Profiler we saw a spike in CPU usage
as we began rendering these PDF thumbnails onto the
screen and my application is actually hung right now.
When it completes the rendering onto the
screen, the CPU usage drops right back down.
So we've collected all the information we want.
Let's stop recording and take a look at this
data that we've just collected and try to see
where we can find areas where we can optimize.
All right so the data that I'm seeing over here
in my Call Tree View is frames from stack traces
that I've collected in my Time Profiler sample.
Right now it's displayed in inverted order which is
a setting that I can set over here on my left corner,
so invert Call Tree, which means that my
deepest stack frame is displayed first
and I can view my call history in reverse.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to bring up the extended
detail view to look at what each of these stack frames,
which back traces each of these stack frames
came from and to do that I'm going to go up here
to the right corner and bring in my extended detail view.
All right, so if you look at these, and I'm not sure if you
can read them, let me just zoom in a little more, all right,
so if you look at these frames, a couple of them seem
to be occurring in libraries that I don't control.
For example this frame, PDF lecture scan,
is getting called from CoreGraphics library
and InflateFastAdler32 is getting called from libz.l.dylib
and if we take a look at the extended detail view for one
of these frames, let me just, and zoom in a little bit,
you can see that these frames are getting called somewhere
in our code over here in ImageWare, calling
these frames in libraries and frameworks
that are system frameworks that I don't control.
Well, in Snow Leopard we've introduced this
new concept of data mining that will allow you
to manipulate your call trees in order to let you
focus in on areas in your code that you can optimize.
So to show you how that works I'm going to control click
on this symbol, PDF lexer scan and it brings up a bunch
of options that I can perform on my Call Tree.
I'm going to charge the symbol to its caller, meaning that
I'm going to take the time that I spent in the symbol,
currently around 4 seconds, and charge it to its caller.
As we can see, now CGPDFScanner appears to be the heaviest
or the symbol that we're spending the most time in.
Well, I'm going to go ahead and charge all of
CoreGraphics, the entire library, to its callers.
So I'm going to hit Charge Library to Callers and with
these two simple steps I can now see that I'm spending 36%
of my time, let me zoom in again so you guys can see
better, 36% of my time, about 5 seconds, in this function,
image item, images and page, which is available,
it's in my code, it's in ImageWare itself.
So what's going on here?
From the extended detail view I can
actually double click on my code
and it will take me directly to
my source code within Instruments.
I just saw imagesInPage over here and the
Time Profiler provides with annotations,
performance annotations about where
I'm spending the most time.
So within imagesInPage I'm spending about
99 percent of my time in CGPDFScanner scan.
So what does this function do really?
This function is reading through the PDF page
metadata and creating the scanner which goes through
and determines the number of images in this page.
Now who's calling this function?
Well, if I hit the info button over here, scroll down,
I can see that image subtitle is actually calling this
and if I double click on that it will
take me directly to that function call.
[ Applause ]
>>So what's happening over here?
Every single time we're trying to display the image
subtitles we're going through creating a new PDF scanner
and trying to determine the number of images in that page.
Now this seems rather wasteful so let
me just go back to Xcode over here,
and I can do that by clicking this little Xcode icon
in the top, well the lower right and here we go.
Xcode brings up my code and, let me just double
click on the Xcode icon, one second, right.
So instead of recalculating the number of images in my
page every single time I'm trying to find the subtitle,
why don't I go ahead and cash this value so that when
I find the subtitle the first time I can just look
up that number later on and I don't have
to do all this work every single time.
So to do that I'm going to add this new
instance variable into my image items
and this instance variable I'm
going to aptly call numb images
Save that, go to my image item, when
I initialize my image items I'm going
to initialize the value of numb images to NSNotFound.
Over here, all right and down where I'm trying to calculate
the imagesInPage, I'm going to check whether the number
of images is NSNotFound first, meaning
it hasn't been calculated yet over here
And then if it hasn't been calculated I will go ahead and
find the number of images in those pages and then return it.
Later on when I'm trying to look up my subtitle,
I can read the cached number of imagesInPage
and I don't have to recalculate it every time.
So let me save this, build and
go back to Instruments and verify
that this change has actually achieved
the performance one that I'm looking for.
So let me just go back to my Call Tree review.
[inaudible background talking] I didn't build it?
Oh, sorry, never mind, here we go.
Delete the old method.
That is key.
[laughter] Save it, build it, all right.
Go back to Instruments [laughter] well
thanks for that and launch it again.
All right so you know bring up my app, hit start and now I
don't see the hanging anymore and it's actually much faster.
[applause] So I can go back to
Instruments and stop recording.
And performance optimization is really an iterative process
so we just, you know, eliminated the lowest hanging fruit,
but really, what you should do is continue
to iterate through your performance analysis
and find more areas where you can optimize.
And in this case we're going to go right ahead and in the
configuration view on the left, hide our system libraries
which is really going to charge all our system libraries
to functions or calls that we make in our code.
And after we do that you can see that now I'm
only spending 355 milliseconds in Image item,
imagesInPage but now my heaviest or my hot spot is actually
occurring in ImageWare controller create image from PDF page
which is you know I'm taking about 3 seconds or so
in that code, which is the code that is going through
and rendering the PDF pages as thumbnails.
Well we're going to go come back to this later.
So to recap what we saw in the demo, what is Time Profiler?
Well it's the next-generation statistical time
sampler that we've incorporated into Instruments.
You can use it in Instruments or you can use it
standalone whenever your Instruments icon is in the dock,
regardless of whether Instruments is running or not.
All you need to do is click on the Instruments
icon and launch either one process, or sorry,
profile either one process or all
the processes on your system.
There are two other ways that you
can launch Instruments, sorry,
there are two other ways in which
you can launch Time Profiler.
You can set it up so that it automatically detects
spins on your system or you can use a set of hot keys
that you can trigger whenever, you know, a
certain application is exhibiting slowness
or is hanging, in order to begin profiling it.
Finally, Time Profiler saves its documents in a special
file format that is compact and it doesn't symbolicate
in this file format, stack traces aren't
symbolicated until the document is opened.
So unopened documents have a short shelf life
and if you change your binaries the actual symbol addresses
are not going to be valid anymore, so keep that in mind.
All right, so why would you use Time Profiler?
Well, Time Profiler has very low impact in terms of CPU and
memory usage which means that it interferes very minimally
in your target application and the timing
data that you get back is very precise.
It performs stricter, more precise time sampling from
within the kernel and this is new in Snow Leopard.
You can use it to profile all thread states or
only thread states that are running on your CPU.
And finally you can use it to profile all
your system processes that are running.
So how does Time Profiler work?
We kind of glossed over that in the demo
but let's go into that in more detail.
Time Profiler collects stack traces from your
running threads at regular time intervals.
Here we have a bunch of example stack traces
that are very similar to the ones we saw
in the demo but they're slightly simplified.
And Instruments is going to take these stack traces and
aggregate them into a more readable form that will allow you
to pinpoint the areas that you need to optimize.
So how does it do that?
So if I assume every single one of these
stack traces took 1 millisecond to execute,
I'm going to build something called an inverted
Call Tree which, as we saw in the demo,
displays the deepest stacked frame first as the
roots of the trees and then it builds it backwards
so that I can view my call history in reverse.
So for example, let's start off here, you can see
that I spent 2 milliseconds in the symbol inflate,
4 milliseconds in lexer but 2 of these milliseconds
went ahead and called symbol inflate and so forth
with CGPDFScanner, imagesInPage and then finally main,
which was the entry into my code, the entry point.
All right, so how does Instruments display these Call Trees?
If we focus on the middle Call Tree over here,
Instruments actually displays it in the form
of an outline view as you can see on the right.
Now Call Trees can get very complicated and a lot of
times you see stack frames from libraries and frameworks
that are not your code but what you really are looking
for is areas in your code that you want to optimize
and you want to be able to simplify your call trees.
So in Instruments and Snow Leopard we've
introduced the very powerful concept
of data mining that will allow you to do just that.
It will allow you to prune your call trees,
simplify them so that you can find areas
of your code that you can change and optimize.
Now in Snow Leopard we have two
types of data mining operations.
We have Library and Symbol Operations and let's just step
through them really fast and, you
know, show you how they work.
So the first of these that we saw
was charging a symbol to its caller.
What this means is that you take a symbol
and attribute the time that is spent
in that symbol to the frames that called it.
Like for example if you take lexer over here and
attribute it to its callers we can then go ahead
and aggregate those two stack frames and you can see
that now I see 105 milliseconds spent in CGPDFScanner.
You can go ahead and charge an
entire library to its callers.
For example if I charge CoreGraphics to its
callers I would take the time spent in CoreGraphics
and attribute that to its calling frames.
And once again I can take this two stack frames in
the far right and the far left and aggregate them.
A lot of times you'd like to discard the amount of time
spent in a certain symbol from the rest of your Call Tree.
You want to say, I want to ignore this symbol and not look
at what time it contributes to the rest of my Call Tree.
And to do that you prune the symbol and its Call Tree.
So for example if I actually decide to prune createImage,
I can discard its entire weight in my Call Tree
and you can see that inflate, I'm spending now 76
millisecondsv in inflate whereas before I was spending 98.
And finally, a lot of times you see your
code call into a lot of stack frames
and system libraries and then call into some other code.
And what you really care about is where that
library called into the rest of the code.
So what you can do is flatten your
library to its boundaries.
And in this case if we flatten CoreGraphics
to its boundaries we're just left
with the boundary frames that call
in to the rest of the code.
So there you have it, data mining in a nutshell,
simplifies the way you view your Call Trees
and helps you find areas in your code that you can optimize.
Now moving on, [applause] in Leopard you've seen
Instruments display their data in one of three typical views
that are shown here and that you can access from
the lower left corner of your Trace Documents.
And for example, in Time Profiler it really had two
views that it used, it used the sample list view
and then the Call Tree view which we see over here.
Now in Snow Leopard we've introduced two new
views that will help you improve your workflow
and these views are actually available for all Instruments.
The first of these is the console view which will display
standard in and standard out, writeWithinInstruments.
You can correlate it in time with the data that
you're getting in your track and in your other views
and Instruments will save these console outputs
per run per document so you can access it later.
[applause] And as we've seen in the demo
we've also introduced the source view,
which will allow you to view your
source code directly in Instruments
and Instruments will annotate your source
code with performance data that they collect.
Like for example, in Time Profiler we saw that we
were spending 99% of our time in CDPDFScanner Scan
and this greatly improves your workflow in Snow Leopard.
So let's go back to our ImageAware application.
At the end of our previous demo, we saw that we were
spending most of our time in createImages from PDF page
which was really calling a bunch of system API
that was rendering the thumbnails onto the screen.
Now in order to improve the performance
of rendering the thumbnails,
we're going to follow a different
approach this time around and instead of --
we're going to make use of the fact that we have about 16,
I believe, logical cores on this machine that I'm running in
and you know we can leverage concurrency on our devices
and leverage the API that we've introduced in Snow Leopard
in order to be able to paralyze the process
of rendering these PDFs as thumbnails.
So in this part of the demo, we've actually changed
the way we rendered the thumbnails so that each --
we've created an arbitrary amount of queues, dispatch
queues that will be performing the rendering operation.
So let's see how that runs and see
whether, you know, we can improve that.
I'm just going to select to run this from
Dispatch, using Dispatch, and hit start.
All right, so it seems to me that, you know, I'm not seeing
the speed up that I'm expecting on such a powerful device.
And really I must be misusing the API in some way,
so in Snow Leopard we've introduced a new instrument
called the Dispatch Instrument that will allow you
to analyze the behavior and the performance of
your target applications that are running Dispatch.
So back in Instruments I just brought
up a new template chooser
and I've already selected the CPU
category over here on the left.
I'm going to go ahead and select the Dispatch Instrument.
All right, I'm going to launch my executable
and just go through the same process of trying
to render my PDF thumbnails off of the screen.
Just remember to select Dispatch and here we go.
All right, so as it's collecting the data back
in Instruments I'm going to stop my recording
because I've collected all the data that I needed and down
in the left corner I'm going to switch to my queues view.
Let me zoom in a little bit, actually let me
just resize these for a second and zoom in.
There we go.
So the queues view shows you all the queues
that your target application is using.
Some of these queues, as you can see over here, like
com.Apple.rootlowPriority, are the global concurrent queues
that lib-Dispatch provides you and you have another
global queue which is the main thread queue,
and this queue is the queue serviced by the main thread.
And down here you can see a whole bunch of queues
called imageBrowser queues, and these are the queues
that I had created in ImageWare
to process my PDF thumbnails.
Now there's a bunch of statistics that
the queues view shows you as well.
For example, it shows you the total number of blocks
processed by these queues over here and you can see
that you know on average the imageBrowser
queues process about you know 34, 32 blocks.
It also tells me about the latency and the
total CPU time that I'm spending on each queue.
There are two things to note over here and one is the
latency, which is really the average amount of time
between when a block is inqueued, propagates
across the queue, and then invoked.
It's actually quite large.
It's about, you know, 3 seconds in general.
And that's one thing to note and maybe, you know, the fact
that my queues have this high latency might be the fact
that I'm not seeing this speed-up in my target application.
And another thing to note is that if we look at the
main queue over here, it seems that I'm inqueuing
about 526 blocks synchronously on the main thread.
So let's, you know, take a look and see what sort
of blocks I'm inqueuing there and what's going on.
So if I zoom out and I'm going to hit the focus button
for the queue and I'm going to focus on the main queue.
It's going to take me to the blocks focus view which
shows me all the blocks that I've explicitly inqueued
on my main queue and it sorts them
by when they've been executed
and tells me how long they've -- how
long they took executing on the CPU.
Right. Let me just, you know, select one of these blocks
because it seems that I'm inqueuing a lot of the same block
on the main queue, and bring up the extended detail
view by clicking the icon in the lower left corner.
For each of the blocks that I have inqueued on the main
queue, that as you can see I'm inqueuing synchronously,
the extended detail view is going to show me stack traces
for when the block has been inqueued
and for when the block has been invoked.
So you can see that I'm inqueuing my block in
ImageAware controller and port files in GCD
and executing my block somewhere from
within the lib-Dispatch mechanisms.
So let me see what sort of block I'm
actually, you know, inqueueing and executing.
I'm going to double click at my, the frame in my invoke
stack trace, and it will take me directly into my code
and I can see the blocks that I've created and inqueued.
So the first block I create over here is really
the block that goes ahead and calls createImage
from PDF page that's rendering the thumbnails.
And later on this block is synchronously dispatching
something onto the main queue and if we take a look
at what it's doing it's actually, let me just
go back, I didn't mean to click that, all right,
so it's actually refreshing the UI and asking the runloop
to redraw the screen to refresh the UI in that case.
So really I don't need to do this operation
synchronously because I don't really need to wait
on the main thread to complete its UI rendering.
So very easily, back in Xcode, if I bring up ImageAware
controller and go down to the code which is calling,
refreshing the UI synchronously, it's just one character
change, I'm just going to change that to Dispatch Async
because you know I'm telling the main
queue to update the UI in its own time.
I don't have to wait on it to complete.
So I'm going to build, save all and back in
Instruments let me run the dispatch instruments again
and verify the change that I've
done actually made an effect.
So I'm going to hit record, bring up
ImageAware, select dispatch and hit start.
I don't know about you but I didn't see that much of an
improvement by changing, you know, the call from dispatch,
Async to Dispatch, sorry, Dispatch sync to Dispatch Async.
So let's investigate this further and
see what Instruments tells us about this.
Let me go back to Instruments and stop recording.
All right, well the first thing
to note actually, if we zoom in,
is that for my imageBrowser queues the
latency has gone down dramatically.
Whereas before I was spending about, you know about 3 to
4 seconds between when a block is inqueued and executed,
ow it's down to around you know 800
to, yeah, about 800 milliseconds.
You can also see that for my main queue I'm no
longer dispatching synchronously onto the main queue.
But really, what's going on here?
If I scroll out, and let me select too a bunch of
my imageBrowser queues to plot in my track view,
let's select these two, and deselect
some of the global queues
so that we can see what's going on,
and zoom in, pull this up a little bit.
OK. So my image browser queues are the
ones over here at the bottom and what I see
in my track view is the number of
blocks processed on those queues.
So my imageBrowser queues are completing their
rendering the thumbnails all the way over here.
And my main queue is actually continuing to, you know,
process the blocks that are asking for the UI updates,
even long after my PDF rendering has completed.
So this seems like, you know, it's an area to optimize.
Another thing to point out is I'm spending about, you know,
1 second over here on my main queue executing
the blocks that are performing the UI update.
So let's step back for a second and take a look
at this information from a different perspective.
If you go down to the bottom left
corner and select the blocks view,
the dispatch instrument will show you all the
blocks that have been executed in a queue context.
Now in this case I only care about blocks that
I've created explicitly so I'm going to go
down into the right corner and filter by ImageWare.
Oops, all right and the block that I care
about is the block that has been dispatched
on the main thread which is import files in GCD block 2.
Let me just also select that to plot it on the screen.
So you can see that I've executed, I've invoked 526
blocks of block 2, of the block that I'm executing
on the main thread and on average each of these
blocks took about 1 millisecond to execute.
And if I look at the extended detail view, it
shows me that invoked stack trace for this block.
Let me go ahead and double click on it and see
why I'm spending so much time in this block.
Well, what is it doing over here?
It's asking the image to refresh, the view to refresh itself
and then it's asking runloop to explicitly redraw the view.
So as an improvement here it seems that we can
reduce the amount of UI update that we're doing.
And what we could do is if we go back to Xcode, instead
of asking the view to redraw itself after every thumbnail
that we've rendered, let's instead
delete these two and bring in this code.
So we're going to ask the runloop to refresh the ImageView
at the end of its runloop and we're going to cancel,
you know, any pending previous requests over here to
refresh the runloop, I'm sorry, to refresh the ImageView.
Save, rebuild and run and see whether we've
improved the performance of our application.
So let's select dispatch, hit start and it's done.
So there you have it.
[applause] What we've seen is part of the
multi-core template that we've added into Instruments
to help you understand the performance and
the behavioral aspects of your applications
that are running using lib-Dispatch
and applications that are concurrent.
So as part of the multi-core application we've
introduced new in Snow Leopard the Threads Instrument,
which we haven't seen in demo but we'll show
you the thread states of all the threads
that have been created in your target application.
It will show you state transitions between when a thread
was running, waiting, suspended or idle, etcetera.
We'll also tell you what type of threads
are running in your target application,
whether they're BSD threads, Dispatch
threads or your main thread.
And it will tell you things about the parent
and child relationships between these threads,
whether each thread is living or terminated, the
number of context switches each thread performs
and finally the total number of CPU time a thread consumes.
Because really the question you're trying to
answer is how many threads do you want to create
in your target application to achieve
concurrency and not create a large overhead.
So let's suppose that these are
the number of runnable threads
that our target application is using, plotted against time.
And let's suppose that my machine that
I'm running on has four logical cores.
Now the first area over here where I have two threads
running on my 4-core machine I'm underutilizing my machine.
I have two idle cores that could be doing more work but
aren't doing any work so really I can be doing better.
In the case of four runnable threads on a 4-core machine,
that's really the optimal that I'm trying to achieve.
And then finally if I have 6 threads running on a machine
with four logical cores I'm actually overcommitted.
At any one time two of these threads are going to be
waiting while the other threads are executing on the cores.
So usually there's a tendency to try to create the
same number of threads as you have units of work.
But the rule of thumb here is try to make the
number of threads closer to the number of cores
on your machine rather than the units of work.
And using a lib-Dispatch actually makes that
very simple for you and you don't have to care
about the hardware that's running, that you're running on.
All right so the second of the Instruments in the multi-core
template is the Dispatch Instrument and this allows you
to analyze your blocks of queues
that are in your target applications.
We saw that there were two ways of representing this data
from a queues perspective and from a blocks perspective
and if we start off with the queues perspective, over
here you can see that the dispatch instrument detects
when blocks are inqueued asynchronously onto a
queue and when they're inqueued synchronously
and it also detects when they're invoked.
So here we invoke a block off of queueA and then we
go ahead and invoke a bunch of blocks over queueB.
And you can see that, you know, my statistics are updated.
I can see that you know I invoked,
I inqueued one block synchronously
onto queueB and the latency has changed as well.
And you can also see this from a blocks view.
In this case I see my block queue bar I've inqueued
about, I've executed, invoked about one type of block
from block foo and four from block
bar but there's this extra block, baz,
and I don't really know where it came from.
But if you take a closer look, block
baz is actually next to the block.
It's been invoked in, within block bar and block
bar has been inqueued directly onto queueB.
And because block baz is nested within block
bar, we actually see it as executing on queueB
and that's why it's going to appear
in your blocks view as well.
So to recap, you can optimize the performance of your target
applications running with Dispatch by looking at the blocks
with the longest duration and the
blocks that are executed the most
and you can also understand the analysis
of applications running lib-Dispatch.
All right let's switch gears and talk about some
memory analysis that you can do in Snow Leopard.
I'm going to bring up Daniel Delwood to tell you about how
you can optimize memory and performance in Snow Leopard.
[ Applause ]
>>Daniel: So howdy.
I'm Daniel Delwood, performance tools engineer and I'm here
to change your perspective a little
bit, to talk about memory.
And we're going to start out by talking about retain/release
which should be very familiar to you as Cocoa developers.
So retain/release mechanics are very simple to
understand the rules, but they're hard to follow perfectly
and when you over-retain something it leads to leaks and
we've presented a leaks template for you in Instruments
since Leopard, but over-releases are also
another type of retain/release problem
and these have been historically a lot harder to track down.
Well now there's an instrument for that.
[laughter] So over-released objects, what
are they and how does that work into a crash?
Well, let's say I have my object
and two other objects, A and B.
Well, when the last release gets sent to my objects
it's then freed and any subsequent messages sent
to it cause the crash because that
memory's freed, it's no longer an object,
and the runtime doesn't know what to do with the message.
So what the Zombies template does is it turns --
it changes behavior of that last release into
making that object a Zombie instead of freeing it.
So the object just stays around in the
lifetime a year process right up to the end
and that way any future errant messages that
get sent to it just cause the Zombie object
to emit a message that we can then record in Instruments.
So the Zombies template then is for detecting those
messages and then also for presenting the retain/release
and autorelease histories of those Zombie objects.
Now to show you what I mean why don't we go
ahead and see a demo of this and show you Sketch.
This is probably everybody's favorite
drawing program, I'm sure.
So I can draw some shapes, you know,
perhaps add a color to one of these
but what I want to do is add a feature to Sketch.
And while I like resizing the canvas, I wish my
graphics inside Sketch would resize with them.
Of course during the real life resize, if
I change the bounds on them constantly,
they get a little bit performance intensive
and so what I've done is I've implemented this
so that every time I do a live resize it creates a renderer
for the view and that renderer just cashes in NSImage
and stretches the image and then does
the balance calculation when I let go.
And so as you can see on that last, what?
Oh, I've got a crash.
So I go back to GBD and take a look and it looks
like I'm crashing in Objective-C message send.
So this is probably an over-release and let me
go ahead and try finding this in Instruments.
So you go to the run menu, run
the performance tools, Zombies,
and Instrument starts up and Sketch
starts in the background.
Now you'll notice this is ObjectAlloc which
is our tool for recording all of the malloc --
free events and all the objects
created in your process lifetime
and if I hit the inspector button there are some additional
options here including the reference count recording
that we have on and our Zombie detection, which
changes the behavior of the last released objects.
So I'll go back to my application and exercise
my feature and try to get it to crash.
And there it goes, it crashed just right on cue.
Well, Instruments provides a flag, a message to
me saying that a Zombie was messaged and if I zoom
in here you'll notice that it says an Objective-C
message was sent to a deallocated object
at this address and what point in time that happened.
And if I click the focus button it transforms my detail view
into the retain/release history for
the object that was messaged last.
Well, it turns out we've got an NSBitmapImage
route and it was malloced at a certain point
and then it was autoreleased and retained and released.
There's quite a history here, in fact I can bring in the
extended detail view to see each of the stack traces.
I'll just scroll all the way down, it was 51 events
and the last one was the Zombie event
after it was supposedly deallocated.
OK, so our job is to track down what the problem is.
How does Instruments help you with that?
Well there's a responsible library column which makes
an intelligent guess at what library was responsible
for calling a certain reference counting point.
So for this, this is our first release that it attributes
to Sketch and you'll notice it's called directly
from our code NSketchSKTliveResizeRenderer snapshot view.
Well, let's go there and take a
look and see if that's our problem.
Go back to our code and here's our snapshot view code.
Well, what do we know?
We know it's an NSBitMap Image Wrap and
here's our Image Wrap getting created.
We've got an alloc, init and we scroll over and yes, there's
an autorelease there, so our net retain count is zero
and this will go away once the autorelease pull pops.
So go down to the only other place it's used are draw
an image add representation, which itself if it wants
to keep ownership will retain the image
wrap and then I release the image wrap.
Wait a second.
I already had a retain count of zero so this is
actually at fault, this shouldn't be happening.
So I can go ahead and delete that, build and while on many
projects it will require a little bit more investigation,
that first hint was correct in this one because
when we started up, draw a couple shapes
and start resizing them, they resize fine.
There we go, tracked it down.
[applause] So that was tracking down some
retain/release problems and introduced
in Leopard was the technology of Garbage Collection.
It's a very, very powerful technology and one of the best
parts about it is that makes retain/release unnecessary.
Your lifecycles of your objects are managed by
references and these references mean that as long
as you are using an object or it's
referenced from a place in your code,
it won't get collected by the Garbage Collector but
you still don't have to worry about retain/release.
It's not a magic bullet, though,
and any unnecessary references
in your code can actually lead to unnecessary memory usage.
Now how is that?
Well, we have an Instrument called the Object Graph
instrument and this is to help you manage those references
and understand the behavior of your application.
Well, first of all you have to understand roots.
And roots are objects in your application
that the Garbage Collector will not collect
because they're considered global
or they're considered top level.
Well, the causes of a root are three things:
first of all you can have a global that points
to an object and that will make it a root.
Second it can be referenced by your stack, by the current
function on the stack in use by your code at the time
and third, CF retains and CF releases are still respected
under the Garbage Collection mechanism while
you can opt in for CF types if you wish.
So the goal of Object Graph is to help you
understand what the roots are and, more importantly,
what the path to your objects are from those roots.
So for example the NSApplication root has a
delegate, which is the SKT App delegate in this case,
and that actually has references to window controllers
for the panels that are used in the background.
So I'm going to go ahead and show you a demo of using
the Object Graph instrument and how you can use it
to understand the behavior of your app
while running under Garbage Collection.
So same project, I'm just going to
switch it to using my GC configuration.
And go ahead and build and start this directly
from Instruments, let me close the other document.
So run, run with performance tool
and I'll use the GC monitor template.
Now this template has three instruments, but for the
purpose of this demo I'm just going to focus on the first,
the Object Graph instrument and what this is does is that
it periodically takes snapshots of my target application
and all of the heap objects in that application.
I'm going to turn that off for now because I'm going
to be talking a little bit more than doing analysis.
And in the detail view here you'll notice it took a
snapshot of all of the objects and this is showing me all
of the objects in my target application
filtered by the block filters on the left here.
So currently I'm looking at just the user-defined
types which is what I usually am caring about most.
In this case you'll notice I have a NSKBO notifying SKT
document as my GraphicView and even my app delegate here.
And this view is for helping you understand the
strong references that Garbage Collection tracks,
so if I turn down this SKTGraphicView, you'll
notice that its next responder is an NSClipView,
its Window is this Window and I
can even turn down this Window
and follow its graph even further
to its delegate or its border view.
Now to top level, you also notice there's
some other statistics such as the thumb size,
so for instance with this GraphicView, it's
referencing a total of about 33 kilobytes.
So I'll go over to my Sketch window
here and I'll exercise my own function
and now that I've done the live resize I'll close the
document and I expect that my document would be gone,
my GraphicView would be gone and well,
most other objects would be gone.
So I take a snapshot of my graph or
my process and it updates this view.
If we look through here we'll notice
that the document isn't there, it's gone.
But the GraphicView is still around in
my application holding on to that 30K.
But why didn't Garbage Collection reclaim GraphicView?
Well, to understand that, we have to
look for the roots of the GraphicView.
So I'm going to select this GraphicViews
focus button and take a look at the roots.
So this GraphicView only has one root and it's a MapTable.
If I bring in the extended detail
view it will tell me why it's root.
Now in this case its one of those three, it's a Global.
The Global is called SKT_cachedRendererForView
and it gives me the address even.
But more important to me is the pass
from this root to my GraphicView,
why is it being kept alive and
this is really the shortest path.
So my MapTable has keys and these keys are
GraphicViews, in this case my GraphicView.
And if I go back to my code I can look for that
global and that global is defined right here,
it's the static NSMap Table SKT_cachedRendererForView.
So what this MapTable is doing and we'll take a
look at the creation point, it's creating a MapTable
with standard key options and standard value options and
then the usage of this is that views get a RendererForView
and so they're created lazily and then added to the key
value pair there as ViewToRenderer and then the contract is
that View destroyed will be called when the
view goes away and we can go ahead and remove
that key value pair from the table, releasing memory.
However, this doesn't look like it's being called,
so if I search for it in the project I can see
that it should have been called in one place
and I go there and whoa, it's in a dealloc.
Well, deallocs aren't called under
Garbage Collection so this is a source
of the difference in behavior between the two modes.
Well there's a couple of ways we can fix this.
The simplest is which to be to
just write a finalize and call it
in the finalize, but finalizers really are a last resort.
There's usually a better way to
do it, and in this case there is.
I'll go back to the creation of that
table and what the problem was is
that the keys were strongly referencing
my views, were strongly referencing.
I can change this MapTable though so that the key
options only weakly reference it, oops, there we go.
So I'm going to change the personality
of my MapTable and here we go.
The key options are NSPointerFunctionsZeroingWeakMemory.
So I'll save that, build it and go ahead
and run it right back in Instruments
and see if my view goes away as I expect.
So draw a couple images, create the renderer
and do the resize, close the document,
take a snapshot and go back to the top level.
So nope, we didn't quite fix it.
So the document again is gone but
the SKTGraphicView is still here.
This is because we looked at the shortest path
to a root but we didn't quite get everything.
So if I again focus on this GraphicView and look
at the path to this, well again the same MapTable,
I'll notice that it's no longer being referenced
by the keys, it's being referenced by the values.
Now the MapTable again map the
views to the corresponding renderers
but the renderers each have a delegate
view which is again that view.
Well this is another one of the behavior changes
between Garbage Collected code and retain/release.
Delegate view references are strong by default.
So I go back to my code and I'll even take a
look at the interface and you'll notice here
that I just declared an NSViewDelegateView and my comment
is not retained in typical delegate fashion for Cocoa.
Well, all I need to do is add the
keyword under weak, save the document,
build it and I will test it again in Instruments.
Let me go ahead and stop this last race and we'll just
run it through here and again exercise my function
and see if I expect that the memory behavior or see
if the memory behavior is what I expect it to be.
So I go ahead and take a snapshot,
go back up to the top level
and now the only two Sketch objects are the
tool palette controller and App Delegate.
So I've correctly gotten rid of the roots to that view
and the GraphicView is collected by the collector.
[ Applause ]
>>OK, so it's a little bit complex there but our problem was
initially at looking at what was in our applications heap
and then asking ourselves, why
did the SKTGraphicView never die?
Well it was because of that one root, which is the
MapTable, and the MapTable was rooted by Global.
It had keys and values and those keys initially
had strong references to the graphic views
and the values were the renderers which
themselves had the images that they were caching
and the delegate view strong reference
to our graphic view as well.
Well, the first thing we did was go to the MapTable and by
putting in that key, that zeroingWeakMemory key personality,
we changed the key's strong reference to be weak.
And then we went over to the interface of
the renderer and by making that part weak
as well we made the delegate view reference weak, which
meant that when the last strong reference externally
to that GraphicView went away, our GraphicView
could be collected, and when it was collected,
those weak references were nilled out by deflector
and then the MapTable removed the value
pair since the key was no longer there.
So the whole goal of all of this was to
understand our GCObject relationships
and you can really use the ObjectGraphs
powerfully to understand those.
You need to use it to understand the unnecessary
dependencies for your objects and try to eliminate
that over-rootedness in your application that leads to
memory growth over time where you would have expected it
to remain steady or to even go back down.
So with that I'll like to invite Lynne back up.
[ Applause ]
>>All right, thank you, Daniel.
So in Snow Leopard we've introduced
a couple of other features.
In Snow Leopard you can now launch Agent and daemon
targets and you can do that by selecting launch executable,
choosing your executable, which will bring up the
target chooser and in the last column you can see,
under the category of launchd the options
of launching Agent and daemon targets.
And for example you know I'm going to
go ahead and launch the dock agent.
So after I select that, Instruments is going
to defer to launchd to launch the dock agent
and when you hit the record button, instead of beginning
the recording process you're actually going to see a panel
that asks you to take the appropriate action
in order to start this agent or daemon.
So in the case of the dock you know
you just move your mouse all the way
to the bottom of the screen to launch the dock daemon.
All right, so ObjectAlloc collects a lot of
data and it might incur a certain overhead.
In Snow Leopard we've added ObjectAlloc filtering
so that you can choose to exclude certain types
of objects from the data that ObjectAlloc collects.
So in this case you can actually set this up by clicking
the info button on the ObjectAlloc Instruments and choosing,
for example, to ignore types with
prefix NS, with prefix CF, et cetera,
so that you can minimize the amount
of data that ObjectAlloc collects.
And just focus on the objects that you care
about that are not created by the system.
All right, and also leaks, you can set it up so that it
throws away lifecycle complete objects meaning you only care
about objects that are malloced and
you know are still in your memory.
Not objects that are malloced and
then released and have gone away.
All right so in Snow Leopard we've introduced flags that
are really bookmarks that allow you to pinpoint areas
in your track or in your execution time
where interesting things have happened.
So we've seen this flags in action in Zombies Instrument
and really they're also user flags that you can add
into your documents and in this case, you know,
you can add a little comment saying for example,
this is the point where I've clicked Safari
in my dock and I'd like to bookmark that.
In Snow Leopard we have faster symbolication of stack
traces and we have symbols for lazily loaded libraries.
So that will make you and your stack
traces much faster and much more efficient.
So Instruments is a very powerful analysis tool.
We've seen a whole set of new instrumentation that we've
introduced in Snow Leopard that will allow you to leverage,
use Snow Leopard technologies and understand it.
And also instrumentation that deals with memory
analysis such as Garbage Collection and Zombies.
In Snow Leopard we've made it very easy for you to pinpoint
and locate the data that you care about very easily
and finally we've improved the
overall performance of Instruments.
So I'd like you to go home and whether you've,
you know, used Instruments before in Leopard
or this is the first time you've
used Instruments, give it a spin.
Try out all our new features in Snow
Leopard and if you have any questions,
please feel free to email Michael
Jurewitz, our Developer Tools Evangelist.
There's some Instrument documentation and
Concurrency Programming documentation available
in the Xcode documentation on your Macs.